# Tiny Life: The Virtual, Textual Reality of LambdaMOO – Medium

Created: 2021-10-25 09:54:14 +0200

Modified: 2021-10-25 09:54:18 +0200

---

**Excerpted from With a Net: An Internet Memoir by J.A.Bell**

*LambdaMOO is a new kind of society, where thousands of people voluntarily come together from all over the world. What these people say or do may not always be to your liking; as when visiting any international city, it is wise to be careful who you associate with and what you say.*

*The operators of LambdaMOO have provided the materials for the buildings of this community, but are not responsible for what is said or done in them. In particular, you must assume responsibility if you permit minors or others to access LambdaMOO through your facilities. The statements and viewpoints expressed here are not necessarily those of the wizards, Pavel Curtis, or XEROX PARC, and those parties disclaim any responsibility for them.*

- From the LambdaMOO login screen.

WHEN WE THINK OF VIRTUAL reality today, all kinds of things come to mind. *Hackers* from the early 90s, maybe *The Matrix*, and all kinds of gadgets that might allow us to live in another, digital realm. All of these dreams of VR involve tricking the senses into believing that they're seeing, hearing and feeling input that isn't actually there, but feels very real to the person using them. In reality, this isn't all that different from child's play, using one's imagination to construct worlds in which the player lives and breathes.

When I was a young adult, I was really into *Dungeons & Dragons*, a role-playing game that used imagination and a storyteller to fabricate a universe in which the characters interacted and completed tasks. Some D&D campaigns could last a character's entire life, from their birth until their eventual demise, usually dying in some heroic way, while others would last a few months and only cover some brief adventure. Either way, it was virtual reality in its most basic form, at least for the most dedicated of players. Many groups that I played in required players to remain in-character for the entire game session, and if you played a lot (and had a good Dungeon Master---the person who "ran" the game and created the virtual world), it could feel as though you were living inside another place and time.

IT WAS THE LATE 1970's, and the nerds were just starting to get their brains around the things they could do with the Internet. After *Zork* and another game, *Adventure* (a D&D-styled computer game with a computerized "Dungeon Master") gained some popularity with the role-playing game crowd, programmers began to think of ways to incorporate these kinds of games with the new, burgeoning global network that was spawning a revolution around them.

Essex University student Roy Trubshaw was a fan of *Dungeons & Dragons*, and a fan of computer games like *Zork.* In 1978, he wrote a text-based adventure game that combined elements of D&D and other text-based adventure games, though with a twist: instead of playing just on your own computer, with only you and the game's narrative to contend with, why not build a system where people could "party up" with you and go on adventures in groups? Trubshaw did just that, programming a game world where multiple users could get together and play as an adventuring party. He named his game *MUD*, an unusual homage to the tabletop D&D game; MUD stood for "Multi-User Dungeon."

"One of my friends up at Rutgers got me into a MUD that was run by a senior classmate of his," Chris Seibold remembers. "MUD is like LambdaMOO but focused more on the game aspect---killing monsters and leveling up---the precursor to the modern graphical online roleplaying game." He remembers spending lots of time playing the Forbidden Lands MUD during his freshman and sophomore years, after his time on the MOO. "I remember MUDding into the wee hours, and while drunk. I had a part time job as a computer lab assistant and I would MUD while I was supposed to be working. I never did get to be very high level (story of my life), but it was here that I first tasted addiction.

"However," he adds, "I don't think it had any more impact on my studies and GPA than other college activities, like PC games or drinking and partying."

*MUD* was, at first, a local-area network (or LAN) game, but in 1980, when Essex University finally went online with ARPANET, it finally joined the larger world of online role-play, becoming the first ever multiplayer RPG on the Internet. In *MUD*, your character accomplished tasks and defeated enemies, much like in other text-based adventure games, gaining experience points and moving up in rank. Once you attained the rank of Wizard, you were a god in the game world. You couldn't die. You could do things other players couldn't do. You were one of the *elite.*

By the time *MUD* achieved the level of popularity it needed to become a success story, Trubshaw had handed the game over to Richard Bartle, another student at Essex. He moved to make the game even more popular, eventually turning it commercial when he licensed the game to CompuServe. Soon, there were multiple MUDs, and the original became known as *MUD1. MUD1* itself was closed down, and its successor, *Essex MUD*, was also closed down when CompuServe pressured Bartle to close down any games with similar names.

However, all was not lost. *MIST*, another variant of *MUD*, still ran on the Essex LAN, and it really became the MUD that was the most popular of all. It continued on for years, until 1991, when the computer that ran it was finally replaced.

PAVEL CURTIS WAS A RESEARCHER at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center, the storied birthplace of many technical innovations of our lifetime. The most famous of these was the mouse combined with a bitmapped graphical user interface, which Xerox gave to Apple for its Macintosh computer. However, one of their most interesting projects was perhaps something far less well known.

In the late 1980's, Curtis was very interested in MUDs, and since 1983, the main areas of focus in his research were programming environments and online collaborative spaces. While he was enjoying playing on various MUDs, he noticed that they were primarily for recreational spaces, and wondered if they could be adapted for a non-recreational purpose. He also wanted to make the environment more malleable, more adaptable to the users. Curtis set about the task of making a new kind of MUD, one that would be programmable by its users and, while in one sense it would be a recreational space (at least to help facilitate the experiment), it wouldn't exactly be a *game.* Curtis himself had "plans for exploring the implementation, applications, and implications of MUDs in work-oriented contexts." What he ended up with only mildly achieved that, and ended up being the focus of an entirely different research subject: online social communities, a phenomenon that, until LambdaMOO, hadn't really been studied. That would all change in the early 1990's, when so many of us would be unwitting rats in the maze of a large experiment. There would be dozens of papers written (some by Curtis himself) about the social implications of virtual reality, a few newspaper and magazine articles (in 1994 Curtis and LambdaMOO were on the cover of TIME), a book (*My Tiny Life* by Village Voice writer Julian Dibbell), a few marriages, and more than a few lives ruined.

It was exhilarating while it lasted, though.

"I DON'T REMEMBER EXACTLY HOW I found out about LambdaMOO," Chris says today. "The steps to reach it were probably posted on one of the BBS message boards." Indeed, the MOO, as it came to be affectionately called, was something few in the beginning were looking for. It was more frequently stumbled upon, with players finding a link to it or hearing about it by word of mouth, like I did.

After connecting to LambdaMOO for the first time, it reminded me a lot of living inside a story. While only text-based, it created a storyline of its own in which the people living inside, called "characters," could present any personality they wanted; there were no limits to what your character was or, in many ways, could do.

Upon first connecting, it feels as though you are being dropped into a story. All of the text output that all the players see is in a literary fashion, looking like such:

Foo says, "hey guys."

Bar waves at Foo. "Hey."

Bud_Weiser grins at Sam_Adams. "Funny!"

Bart teleports in.

Bart [to Homer]: Eat my shorts!

"The draw with LambdaMOO for me was that it was part game, part programming environment, and part experimental community," Chris explains. "It was a text-based virtual environment that you could manipulate with commands like an adventure game, as in *Zork*, but the really novel thing was that you were sharing that environment with other people in realtime. It took the concept of the BBS message board and IRC and brought it to the next level." In addition, Chris says, you had new kinds of social expression to explore and novel things to learn. "Not only could you find new and fascinating things to do in the social sphere, like spamming, flaming, and cybersex, you could also try your hand at object-oriented programming."

In object-oriented programming, or OOP, *everything* is an object. On the MOO, this principle is the center of the universe: everything is an object, from your character and his or her possessions, down to the very *first* object, the *parent* object, Object #1. On MOO, all players and the things they own, and even the places they live in are considered objects, and those objects have actions, or verbs, associated with them. A new player, for instance, will have a set of verbs associated with them when they are created, such as "say" (to speak), "emote" (to convey some sort of emotion), or "wave," to name a few. Room objects are essentially just container objects; they have a description, and can hold other objects, like players, or furniture. After being on the system for awhile, a player can get programming privileges and create new objects with new code that can do new things.

"The object-oriented nature of LambdaMOO meant that if you liked something that was already part of the landscape, you could copy it and change its functionality," Chris explains. "I remember I copied someone's 'movable room' and changed the descriptive text so that it looked like the Millennium Falcon, and would announce itself warping in from hyperspace every time it entered a room."

Still, even with the programming experience one could gain, the real attraction was the vast world waiting to be explored. "I never programmed anything that great," admits Chris, "but I spent a lot of time exploring the environment." After connecting for the first time, you find yourself inside the Lambda House, a large mansion somewhere in California that has many rooms, though much like a real house, most denizens would congregate in main areas, such as the Living Room (object #17). (A less likely hangout spot that ended up being very popular was the Coat Closet, object #11, that had the unusual property of hiding the room's contents on entry.) All players can create their own rooms using the @dig command, making a place that a character can call their own. Some people built themselves entire houses, and sheltered communities of people within them.

LambdaMOO was, by the time I arrived, such a complete foreign society that it had its own laws and its own justice system, which was ultimately backed up by a powerful MOO force, the Wizards. The Wizards of LambdaMOO were the gods of the world, who could do literally *anything* that needed to be done. When ballots were put forth by the public to enact a new law or policy, the Wizards were the ones who made the law work programmatically. They also provided the structure of the arbitration system that was used to punish those who broke the law. MOO citizens acted as arbitrators (unless they were shown to be frequent lawbreakers), and disputes that were brought up were assigned to an arbitrator who volunteered to take it on. Both sides would present their cases, people could follow the discussion and provide input or evidence of their own, and the arbitrator would make a recommendation for punishment if the situation called for one. Examples of sentences handed down ranged from losing the ability to continue to program new objects, to being "@toaded"---a death sentence.

At first glance, LambdaMOO seemed silly, but it didn't take many people long to become hopelessly addicted to the escape it provided, in many cases causing it to become not an alternate reality, but the primary one.

IT WAS ABOUT THREE WEEKS before my 18th birthday, and I'd been up late on Grex, messing around on some of the forums. MTV was on the television, mostly just to provide light and music at the same time. The ashtray on the desk was nearly full, and my ever-present cup of diet cola was probably empty. I was getting bored with Grex, and with BBSes in general, and at some point in the middle of the night, I remembered Chris's email about LambdaMOO. Still thinking it sounded like a fraternity for cows, I dropped in the command to connect over telnet to the site. The pre-login help suggested I could login as a guest, and I did just that. As all guests were, I was deposited into The Coat Closet, where a flurry of conversation was already happening. I was immediately overwhelmed, trying to figure out *what* to do, much less *how* to do it. I was pointed quickly to the tutorial (accessed by typing the @tutorial command), and learned quickly how to direct speech and emote, as well as some basic commands, like wave and laugh.

By the end of the night (or, I should say, early morning) I was finding my legs. I had already joined some conversations, introducing myself to some of the MOO's regular residents. One of my first friends, a character who named herself after a brand of whiskey, helped me through my first few nights, introducing me to other regulars and showing me around the Lambda House, and by the end of my third night, I had already registered for my full character. I chose a name that now I wish had been more original, but since one of my favorite bands of the time was Primus, I selected a moniker after their bassist and frontman, Les Claypool (and so my name became Les_C). Unlike some of the other players, I didn't really have a MOO persona; rather, I described my character as I imagined others described me in real life. I made myself a little room to live in, a bedroom that I would've wanted to live in myself. I explored, I met lots of people, and I immersed myself in the ways of the MOO.

It wasn't the construct of the world itself that drew me into addiction, however. It was the people, combined with the constructs and their direct morphability, that made it so easy to become obsessed. The conversations that went on were so gleefully silly and intelligent by turns, witticisms interspersed with random actions that made it not only feel real, but made it feel *superior* to actual reality. There was human interaction that was created in a way that would allow outsiders to feel like they belonged in this new, text-based universe. Here were the outcasts of normal culture, geeks and nerds who could, possibly for the first time ever, be themselves with other geeks and nerds. While I wasn't quite the geek or nerd that many of the other residents were, I felt at home among them.

Within weeks, I found myself sleeping during the day (when I should have been out looking for a job) and up all night on LambdaMOO. I would usually wake up at about 4pm or so, before my father got home from work, make dinner, and by 7:30 or so I would go to the sandwich shop where Chuck worked, and hang out for a little bit, mostly so I could grab some food he would slip me for the long night ahead along with some soda (and steal some cigarettes, something that was all too easy there, and in my youth was too easy to be blasé about), and then be home by 9:30. By 10:00, I was fully immersed in the MOO world. I would usually feign sleep between five and six am, in case my dad slipped in my room to check on whether or not I was up too late, and then be back online until about ten or eleven, when I would go to sleep again.

The nights were filled with fun and drama, something everyone who felt like an outsider for so long wanted. Conversations, debates, fights, arguments, loves begun and ended; after awhile, you felt like you *were* your character, and everything happening on the screen could just as easily have been happening in your own living room. Sometimes I would just watch, sometimes I would be fully embroiled in the situation. There weren't even really cliques like there were in the real world; everyone was an island, with their own personalities and their own views, their own unique senses of humor.

I quickly established friendships with lots of other players, people of all ages and from all over the world, from locales as close as down the street from my house to a girl from Thailand. Suddenly, I had found someplace I could call home. It didn't at all matter to me that the place didn't really exist.

I really wasn't much of a programmer, but I wanted to carve out some kind of contributory niche for myself on LambdaMOO, and there were several ways a regular citizen could serve. You could join the Architecture Review Board (ARB), which reviewed requests for more building quota, but that wasn't really for me; I wasn't much of a builder either. Instead, I decided to go for a spot as an arbitrator. You had to put yourself on the ballot and be voted on by your peers, and I made the cut. I felt like it would be a good fit for the position, as I considered myself logical and fair, two things I was definitely not at the age of 18. I fancied myself more of an intellectual than I actually was at that ripe young age.

I did my duties, however. When available, I would scan the open disputes between players and see if there was anything that I could help with, barring disputes with players I was "friends" with. (No one wants a conflict of interest, after all.) I could put myself up to be selected as the arbitrator, and if both sides agreed, the dispute process would begin.

A mailing list (essentially a list of posts) would be created among the people involved, and a separate public one was also created which allowed anyone who wanted to comment on the dispute to do so. Both sides would present evidence---logs from rooms, programmatic evidence of wrongdoing, or just a collection of witnesses---and I tried to suss out if someone had broken one the MOO's various rules and laws regarding interaction between players or other ethics violations. After that phase was over, I would consider which side might be wrong, and recommend a fitting resolution, which would be handed up to the Wizards. The Wizard who picked up the recommendation would either reject it (a rare occurrence) or enact the sentence.

The sentence for many infractions was being stripped of your programming privileges, or maybe you would be kicked off the MOO for a period of time (or permanently). Some punishments were somewhere in the middle of those extremes, but most disciplinary action had to be doled out by the Wizards, due to their God-like nature and the lack of ability for peons like a civilian to mete out justice.

I felt pretty good about the few disputes I arbitrated, until I found myself the target of a couple. Some of my real personality at 18 and 19 came through on the MOO, and it wasn't always that of a nice guy. I played pranks on people using spoofing, which was a way to make it look like someone else was doing or saying something they actually weren't, and after a time of doing that I ended up on the receiving end of a dispute. I didn't have much of a defense, and there were plenty of witnesses, so my programming privileges were revoked for six months, and I found myself no longer an arbitrator.

LAMBDAMOO WAS AT THAT TIME very populated (compared to now), but with hundreds of people connected at any given time rather than millions, like many communities have today. That seemed like a lot of people, even if it really wasn't, and still the odds of meeting everyone in this fake world wasn't likely. While some people, like me, were always in a public space, plenty of people hung out in their own rooms, with a few select friends, doing whatever it was they would do.

It seemed unlikely, then, that I would actually meet someone so geographically close, but one day I ran into a character that was near my age and who had a pretty seductive description. Through the course of talking, we discovered that we did not live more than a few miles from each other, and quickly agreed to meet. After Christine and MT HED BBS, this was the first time since then I would meet someone I had come across online, but it would be the start of many more.

I didn't have a car, so Wanda met me near my house, outside the local A&P supermarket. It was an ideal choice because it was right outside the apartment complex I lived in and was easily locatable on the main highway in Randolph. She brought a friend, Todd, who was another guy from LambdaMOO, as kind of a chaperone (which made sense), and I thought she was very pretty when I found her outside the store.

We hopped in her truck and headed to her house, our agreed-upon hangout spot. We talked about the people we knew from Lambda, our computer setups, and our lives in general, which for her, included a boyfriend. I was kind of dismayed to find out about that, but as with so many other things, my only thought on the matter was *c'est la vie.* I remained friends with her and Todd, hanging out with them a few more times before a day came when we all hung out with her boyfriend, though shortly thereafter, Wanda broke up with him to date me. Thus began my first from-the-MOO relationship.

About half of our time interacting with one another was spent online, in the virtual MOO space. We flirted, she teased me a lot, and eventually we slept together. I was still young enough to be exploring who I was sexually, and didn't have a lot of experience, either with sex or dating, and eventually we broke up, though we remained friends on LambdaMOO. On the MOO, real life didn't matter much, so we still flirted, she still teased, and she got mad when I became interested in other MOOers, despite her not wanting to get back together in real life.

NOT AS THOUGH IT WERE any surprise that sex should play such a large role in any society, virtual or otherwise, it was an even more important component of life on LambdaMOO.

Think of all the fetishes in the world, think of all the degrees of sexual identity in the human race, and imagine all of the things people can't talk about or act out because of the shame they feel for those things. Now, picture a place where you can *be* anyone you want, almost literally; you can be and change into anything, and you don't have to reveal your true identity as you discuss the things you would *never* dare talk about with anyone in meatspace, where there are consequences. On LambdaMOO, there were no consequences to the things you said. (Or so some thought.)

MOOsex is a topic that's been covered extensively elsewhere, and to the uninitiated, it's just a glorified form of cybersex, which is talking dirty online. MOOsex, or "tinysex," was the same in function, but very different in form. It was an engagement of personalities in a way that the people who participated had often not experienced before. LambdaMOO is a very literary environment, its members usually well-spoken, with imagination and humor of a sort that is very different from the kind found in most other online communities, so it should come as no surprise that the sex lives of its citizens would be filled with the same originality and fun, and that translates to sexual activities on LambdaMOO. You could do *anything* on the MOO, describe things in any way you wanted, and if your partner was creative and imaginative and on the same page as you, the sex could be something purely wonderful, even if it was not real. Most real sexual engagement occurs mentally and emotionally anyway, not physically, so it's not as much of a stretch as some believe.

Such as it was, MOOsex was something I found interesting. I'd never had cybersex before, but the first time I was seduced on LambdaMOO was one of the headiest experiences of my young life. Samantha was about my age and lived just outside of Philadelphia, and was fairly social and popular on the MOO. We met in the living room of the Lambda House, which at the time was one of the two most social areas in the house (the other being the Coat Closet), and I did my best impersonation of chivalry to woo her. We spent a lot of time together online, talking and engaging in more virtual physical activities, and after a few months we agreed to meet. She was going to be home for the summer from college and I was to spend the weekend with her at her parent's house.

She drove in from Pennsylvania and picked me up. I hadn't seen her beforehand, but I wasn't disappointed, and neither was she. Sam was far less socially awkward than I was, but I didn't take too long to become comfortable on the ride to her house. A few hours later, I was ushered into the house of an upper-middle class family, and my uncomfortableness returned. I wasn't used to these kinds of people or houses, and I was constantly worried I would do or say the wrong thing. Somehow, I managed to conduct myself well, though they weren't impressed by my lack of gainful employment. Sam's father was in the computer industry, and I was very interested in technology on all levels, so we had something to talk about, at least.

Sam showed me around her neighborhood, and we played pool, ate at some great places, and took in a movie. We had dinner with her family (which included an aunt and uncle during the first night), and I spent the night in the rec room in the basement. Sam came down with me, and we watched *Jurassic Park.*

We made out heavily during the film, which led to other things. Without getting into nitty gritty details, an argument came about over a sexual matter when I didn't want to do something, and the rest of the weekend was spent coolly. We argued on the way back to my house, and... well, that was that. We barely talked on the MOO after that except to trade jabs at one another. However, one day, during a particularly fierce verbal brawl that broke out in the middle of the living room, she decided to bring up a certain size issue that many men are sensitive to (whether or not the comments are true!). I was furious, and I was still a bit juvenile. I started spoofing her, a means of making it look like someone is saying something they did not say. I made Sam say terrible things about herself, even as the actual character was pleading that she wasn't saying them. In my anger, I was very amused, as were some of the other bystanders in the room, but what I didn't know was that a programmer was watching the exchange while recording some of the programmatic events that were occurring, and recording them.

That person was Ian, a friend of Sam's, who eventually called a dispute against me in defense of her. It was against the rules to spoof another player's speech or actions, but I didn't think anyone would have *proof* of my nefarious actions. Alas, I lost the dispute, and lost my character for a week and my programming ability for a month. After the dust had settled, I had tried to make amends with Sam, apologizing for what I'd done, but she would not hear it, and a short while later, she left the MOO.

ONCE I REGAINED MY "PROGRAMMER BIT" or progbit---a phrase which referred to a character's programming privileges being set to "on"---I decided I should probably learn how to actually program. LambdaMOO had its own programming language, a cross between C++ and LISP, and a few manuals and tutorials were available on the MOO itself. I did some basic things, like my own "bonks." Bonks were silly little programs that allowed you to "hit" someone over the head with something, and have them say one of a variety of pre-programmed messages, usually themed along with the object you hit them over the head with. It was a stupid object, but fit in with the random nature of humor on LambdaMOO. For instance, you might see a Matrix bonk:

Foo jacks Bar into the Matrix. Bar exclaims, "I know Kung Fu!"

I also expanded my living quarters into a full house. I created a walkway leading up to what looked like a run-down house, with an Inferno-esque plaque warning unwelcome visitors to turn around and leave. Inside, however, was a beautiful home with marble floors and an upstairs area that was always under renovations. On the first floor was my den (where I would spend time learning to program), a kitchen, a living room, and a bedroom. I created a few basic objects to adorn my new abode, and created fun descriptions of the kinds of rooms I would want in my real fantasy house. I had some big plans for the upstairs areas, but I never got around to them, so the staircase was always blocked with *CAUTION* tape.

I felt really bad about what had happened with Samantha, so I started maintaining a more low-key existence on the MOO. I still spent time in the living room, but I wasn't as loud or boisterous as I had been, having been humbled by the public dispute process. I was still spending every night in the virtual community, and I'd witnessed so much; MOO marriages, real romances becoming real weddings, tragedies, and some MOOers even ruining other MOOers' real lives. After a time, it felt as though LambdaMOO had become my *real* existence, more so than meatspace had. Many months had gone by after my encounter with Samantha, and spending every night in front of a computer terminal, watching white text on black backgrounds go by, made my brain turn to *mush.* When walking outside, my eyes would involuntarily move left to right, mimicking the eye's act of reading. When speaking to real people, I would accidentally verbalize the "say" and "emote" commands before speaking. It was becoming a real problem; addiction to the community was a commonly shared trait among many MOOers, and while Internet addiction is a fairly common phenomenon today, it was not in the mid 1990s. People I had been friends with in the real world couldn't understand why I was home every night, sleeping all day, and acting strangely when they would see me out and about.

Clearly, the addiction was bad, but it never even occurred to me that there was a problem. I was too close to it to realize there was any kind of a problem. I wasn't working, I was still living at home, I was stealing from local stores to get junk food and cigarettes. In short, I was a mess. But at night, in the glow of the monitor (or in my head, in the open living room of the Lambda House), I didn't want to be anywhere else. And as time went on, I became even more immersed in the wiles of the MOO. I was "MOOdating" several girls at once (most of whom did not know about each other), and I honed my skills to be able to harass annoying players without getting caught (and usually even without breaking any rules). I was getting some attention in my life finally, even if it was ill-gotten. The allure of the virtual place just grew as my ego began to expand. I was finally, in cyberspace, the person I wanted to be in real life.

And then I met Jenny.

YOU KNOW THE MOMENT IT happened, that first line, the first thing he or she said to you to make you realize you were head over heels in love. You remember that first look, or that thing she said to make you laugh, or that romantic gesture he made that melted you. You remember the first touch, the beginning blossom of love.

Well, maybe *you* do, but *I* don't. I couldn't tell you now how Jenny and I met (although I know it was the living room), I don't have any recollection of the first things we said to each other, and I don't at all recall the moment we fell in love. I *do* know that it happened, though the details are fuzzy. I know a few other things, too, and let me tell you what they are.

First, it's easier to fall for someone's personality on LambdaMOO, if it's compatible with your own. For many nerds, the awkwardness of physical bodies makes interaction graceless and difficult; remove that from the equation, and you're left with the connection of the psyche. Thus, even a clumsy, not-all-that attractive boy like me could meet girls. That's how it happened with Jenny. Something about the way she conversed, and the silly, almost random nature of our communication was extraordinarily attractive to me, and it was more enticing to me than the beauty of a hundred girls I'd met before. There was just something about it that spoke to a reservoir of emotion inside of me. It wasn't like Christine, either; in truth, I'd forgotten all about her by now. No, this was something altogether *new.*

The second thing is that she lived very far away from me, about as far away as someone could live and still be in the United States. At first, this wasn't such a big deal, because we were just enjoying the newness of everything that was happening. We were both still young (she a couple of years younger than me), and we were both still exploring this concept of text-based VR, so there was little pressure to rush things. Later, as time went on, this geographic separation would take a toll on our long-distance relationship. Jenny and I eventually took things "offline" in other ways, though; we wrote letters to one another in the beginning, with photographs enclosed, and I would buy phone cards with the little money I had and use them to call her from the pay phone near my house. Initially we were shy, sometimes not saying much, despite the prolific amount of conversation we had together online. It was illustrative of how different the two worlds were for people like us, the online world where our own human awkward natures didn't make a lick of a difference, where we could be whomever we wanted---and the physical world, where we tripped over our own feet and lived, breathed, and died like mere mortals.

We made no secret about our relationship on LambdaMOO, but neither did we put it out there for our fellow MOOers to judge. Those who knew approved, pointing out that we made a good couple. We joked privately about MOO-marrying (which, obviously, means two characters getting married on MOO). We were like two peas in a pod, and we genuinely loved each other. Our mutual love for language and silliness kept our hearts bound for a time; once, she wrote me the sweetest email that anyone has ever written me.

After awhile, the need to meet her began to creep more and more into my days, and though our characters were intimate on LambdaMOO, we both felt our baser desires grow stronger in the physical realm. As it turns out, even our characters weren't "physically" intimate enough with one another, as she began seeking out other MOOsex partners. To add to this wounding of my pride, she told me of this by mail. In my wannabe romantic-macho way, I declared that I would be the first to come meet her. "How will you even get here?" she asked me.

"I'll walk," I said, quite sure that I meant it.

"You're not *walking* to Alaska from New Jersey," she replied. Of course, she was right. As much as I didn't want to be challenged for my girl by some pretentious-looking Bostonian dude with cooler glasses than I had, it turned out it actually *was* impractical to travel nearly four thousand miles by foot.

Ultimately, I might as well have done just that. Not more than a few months after the beginning of the disintegration of our online romance, my father had enough of my not working and the endless nights of being online and days of sleeping. He unceremoniously told me he wanted me to leave, and after a day or so, I packed a bag with clothes, notebooks, books, my portable CD player, some CDs, and some food. Most people would've gone to a friend's house to crash while they got on their feet. Not me; all my friends were just typists behind the characters they pretended to be on a text-based virtual reality site.

In the real world, I was on my own.




