# the art of feedback

I want to talk a bit about the art of feedback. 
I think this year will be my 20th in the game industry, or pretty close to it. I’ve seen feedback go right and I’ve seen it go really wrong, and maybe the one conclusion I can draw is that I’ve never seen an organization truly master it to the point where it becomes second nature. You always have to practice getting better at feedback and you continually have to reinforce the right way to do it.
By feedback, I’m talking about everything from “I think this character is cool, but would be more cool if she had sharper strengths and weaknesses” to “My character feels really weak after that last nerf” or even “I don’t like this art.”
 Unless you are in a really hierarchical organization where you have some kind of savant making every design and product decision, feedback is a really powerful tool that helps make our crappy ideas into great executions. 
But it’s tricky to do well, and you can burn relationships if you do it poorly (on either side).
I’ll also include here what I think is the right way to do it. This isn’t the only way to do it, but I’ve had a lot of success with this model. It works in many situations in your work or personal life, but the situations I am most specifically talking about are game developers giving feedback on a change or feature to their colleagues before something ships, or to players giving feedback to developers on a change or feature after the players have heard about or experienced the thing in question.
The idea behind feedback is to make informed decisions. The informed part comes from the person giving the feedback. As the person who worked on a thing, you don’t want to bumble around in darkness. You want to be knowledgeable about this thing upon you have worked on. Maybe you’re too close to it. Maybe a fresh perspective brings a literal fresh perspective. Maybe you’re not the target audience so you want to consult with someone who is. Maybe (like me) you just work with a bunch of people who are smarter than you. You seek out opinions on your thing that might help make it better.
But at the end of the day, projects also need someone to make the decision. I haven’t seen consensus-based decision making to be very effective in game development. It has all of the risks of design by committee. The vision risks getting watered down because everyone is probably coming with a different perspective and different goals. If the character I designed is supposed to be a healer, and you really want her to be a nuker, then her design may get muddied if I listen too much to your perspective.

Now, if you have given the feedback, then congrats, you’ve done your job and you should move on. You should not belabor the point until you get your way. Getting your way isn’t informed decision-making. It’s design by consensus, or perhaps even dictatorship, because you are being a blocker until you get your way. (The relationship is slightly different if it’s your neck that’s on the line for the decision even if someone else makes it, but that’s a bigger topic.)
If you are the feedback receiver, you should feel free to disregard feedback if it violates your goals or you otherwise judge the feedback to not be helpful. But if you do this constantly, you may find people stop giving you feedback (at best) or lose trust in your intentions (at worst). So I always say that you are empowered to ignore feedback, but you do ignore it at your peril. 
You also may not even need to defend why you rejected all or part of the feedback. I’ve found this depends a lot on the feedback giver. Some people are content to say their piece and move on. Others want more of a one-on-one debate to be satisfied. The latter isn’t always scalable though, say if you are a designer talking to hundreds of players about a contentious design.
In practice, I also try to provide one safety valve here, which I call die on a hill, as in “Are you willing to die on a hill for that change?” It’s a way of making sure that someone providing feedback doesn’t feel too powerless about issues in which they are really, really passionate. But here’s the deal with dying on a hill. You can’t use it too often. It’s like your get out of jail free card. You don’t get many of these. Use it too often and the feedback receiver is just going to start ignoring you because they can’t differentiate between “Hey, maybe you want to think about changing this” and “The company is going to go down in flames if you don’t change this.” 
This works well with colleagues, but is harder to deploy with players, often because you are talking about such numbers that you’ll always find someone out there willing to cash in their die on a hill card. 
With players, a better strategy is to make sure they understand the goals of your design or feature and then why you believe the details help meet those goals. Players may not agree with the goals or the implementation but at least they’ll hopefully understand what you were hoping to do.
Again, this shit is hard, and I could write a couple of books on cases where I have seen it blow up in spectacular ways, even among experienced developers who should really know better. 
Just remember that (hopefully) your colleagues and players are all trying to do the same thing - which is to make your thing great.

https://askghostcrawler.tumblr.com/post/166332968693/i-want-to-talk-a-bit-about-the-art-of-feedback-i
